The game goes to he who outlasts the
adversary. And what the Chinese want to
do is to just keep things really really
stable and just wait for the western
countries to collapse.
[Music]
Just how powerful has China really
become?
What does China's leadership really
want?
If America is in a new cold war, who's
going to win?
My guest today thinks that the US has a
lot to learn from Chinese success if we
want to remain the world's leading
power. Dan Wong is a research fellow at
Stanford's Hoover Institution and the
author of the new book Breakneck,
China's quest to engineer the future.
Dan Wong, welcome to Interesting Times.
>> Thank you for having me, Ross.
>> You're very welcome. Thank you for being
here. So, we're going to talk about
China and the Chinese model and how it
compares to the American model,
strengths, weaknesses, conflict,
coexistence. But I want to start by
talking about your own experience. You
were in China from about 2017 through
about 2023, correct? Right.
>> And you were a technology analyst. You
were a writer. You wrote an annual
letter about what you saw in China. and
you traveled a lot. So, I want you to
start by telling us a story or giving us
an image or a place that you visited or
saw or experienced that you looked at
and it made you think the 21st century
is going to belong to China. Here's a
vision from 2021. In the summer of 2021,
China had closed off its borders to co
when I was living in China's richest
city, Shanghai. My life uh was uh full
of ease and full of beauty. You are
never very far away from a subway
station. They're constantly expanding
their subway stations. Shanghai had
about 500 parks in 2020 and at the end
of this year in 2025 the city government
declared that it will have about 1,000
parks. It has uh all of the big
skyscrapers that are so iconic uh in
China. But below these skyscrapers, you
also have a lot of these wonderful
noodle shops and dumpling shops that I
love to frequent. And so Shanghai is a
highly functional city. Uh I would say
much more functional than New York City.
Uh but I was feeling a little bit cooped
up in Shanghai. I wanted to go see the
great countryside uh in the rest of the
country throughout the provinces. And so
what I decided to do was take two
friends and go on a lengthy bike ride in
China's southwestern province of Gujo.
Um, and this was a land where a local
said that not three ft of land is flat.
Not uh 3 days go by without rain. Not a
family has three silver coins. And
China's fourth poorest province, I was
surprised to see, had much better levels
of infrastructure that one could find in
much wealthier places in the United
States like New York State or
California. And so throughout this 5-day
bike ride in which we cycled from Gujo's
capital city uh to the mega city,
hydropunk city of Chongqing, which was
China's wartime capital. We traversed
these beautiful green mountains. We saw
very tall bridges all around us. We saw
a guitar making hub. We saw a a lot of
uh fancy new roads that were a cyclist's
dream. And it was only afterwards when I
realized how bizarre it was that China's
fourth purse province um about the level
of GDP per capita of Batswana much less
than um Shanghai or Guangong was able to
build all of these things. And uh it is
a province with 11 airports, 50 of the
highest bridges in the world, and uh
brand new spiffing uh highways. And that
was because China was just building a
lot in its equivalent of a South Dakota
or West Virginia. So your experience was
basically like being in the New York of
China and finding it more pleasant and
beautiful and civilized than our New
York and then going out to China's West
Virginia and discovering that it had far
better infrastructure than the richest
American states. That's right. The
cities in China are, I would say, quite
a bit better than the cities in the US.
Uh here in New York, we have these
subway lines that are screamingly loud.
Um, have you ever heard of these
metallic screeches once you're in the
subway stations? We're sitting here in
the offices of the New York Times just
across from Port Authority bus terminal.
The governor of New York recently
announced that they're going to
refurbish the Port Authority bus
terminal. Hooray. And it's going to take
yours.
>> Yes. Well, and if you've been in the
Port Authority bus terminal, it's like
Hercules cleaning out the Aian stables,
right? To say you're going to refurbish
>> clean out those stables. And Shanghai is
able to clean out those stables. And the
Chinese countryside is also superbly
built up.
>> So China builds and the US doesn't. And
one of your arguments is that this
reflects a fundamental difference in our
elites and who rules our respective
societies. And that China is a society
of engineers.
It's ruled by engineers. The Communist
Party is filled with engineers.
And America is a society of lawyers.
What does rule by engineers mean and
what can it achieve that is harder to
achieve in the United States? My framing
of China is as an engineering state
because since the 1980s uh top leader
then Diaoing started promoting a lot of
engineers into China's leadership uh
really as a corrective to the mayhem of
the Mao years. Mao was a romantic. He
was a poet who inflicted all sorts of
strange disasters on the Chinese
population. And Dunciaoing took a look
at what was wrong with China uh under
Mao. And Dung said that what we need is
highly efficient technocracy and
technocrats at the time meant engineers
mostly trained in the Soviet style of
heavy industry. Chinese were civil
engineers, they were mechanical
engineers, they were all sorts of
electrical engineers that Dangoing
promoted into the highest ranks of the
communist party. And by the year 2002,
all nine members of the standing
committee of the pilot bureau had
degrees in engineering. I contrast that
with the lawyerly society of the United
States. What is really striking about
the US is that, you know, the founding
documents of the Declaration of
Independence read almost like a legal
argument. Most of the founding fathers
were lawyers. And so that's kind of the
contrast that I set up that China is an
engineering state trying to build its
way out of every problem. The US is a
lawyerly society that is really good at
stopping a lot of things. What that
means is that the US doesn't have
functional infrastructure almost
anywhere, I would say. And it also
doesn't have these stupid ideas like the
one child policy either.
>> Talk a little bit more about
how engineers see the world.
>> Something that engineers do is not only
construct a lot of bridges and subway
systems and highways and nuclear plants
and coal plants in highly rational ways.
Um they are also very intent on treating
the economy as if it were a vast
hydraulic system made up of a series of
valves. And part of what uh I have seen
living in China uh was that uh Ciin Ping
in uh the years 2020 to roughly 2022
decide that the economy was just
something that could be pushed around.
uh as well uh he engineered a property
crackdown to reduce the leverage of um
stateowned enterprises uh in terms of uh
housing development. He also very
dramatically uh re-engineered a lot of
the online tech sector as well. And
there was this series of thunderclaps
that uh she issued against major Chinese
companies that included Alibaba uh an
e-commerce company DD which was a riot
healing company uh the entirety of the
online education sector and uh she and
the rest of the pilot bureau essentially
wiped out about a trillion dollars from
China's stock market back then. And I
think part of that was trying to funnel
China's best and brightest, the people
graduating from the top universities,
away from building cryptocurrencies or
consumer tech, uh, and hedge funds into
building industries that are more
critical to strategic needs, something
like semiconductors, aviation, chemistry
instead. And so uh what CCM Ping really
tried to do was to really engineer the
economy in a way that um the communist
party really wants to uh achieve some
vision of success. So what you just
described in terms of the communist
party's view of what had gone wrong with
the tech sector is a view widely shared
in the United States including by people
deeply involved as you know in Silicon
Valley itself right the idea that at a
certain point Silicon Valley just became
a machine for generating new apps and
you know ride sharing and you know
getting people's Door Dash deliveries
there as fast as possible but lost any
direct connection to building rockets
and flying cars and new infrastructure
and making other kinds of breakthroughs,
right? But the American assumption is
that when capitalism goes wrong, the
solution has to be some kind of
deregulation that you can't just have
someone sitting in Washington DC say,
"Okay, Silicon Valley, too many rid
share apps. We're gonna turn the dial
and we're gonna develop, you know, more
self-driving cars and highspeed rail or
something like that." Right? And part of
the argument you present in the book is
that over the last 10 or 15 years, China
has actually succeeded in turning its
dials in ways that are generating
cutting edge breakthroughs, cutting edge
research and technological mastery. So
talk a little bit about that, what you
see as that achievement.
>> I think um China has achieved a pretty
high level of technological mastery. Uh
I moved to China at the uh start of 2017
in large part to study a major
industrial plan that the state council
had announced called made in China 2025.
This was a grand ambitious plan, a one
of a series of plans uh from the
Communist Party to say that China really
needs to master these industries of the
future that included clean technologies,
that included electric vehicles, um
maritime technologies, agricultural
equipment, whatever you want to name, uh
it is listed somewhere in these plans,
sometimes with these exquisite
percentages of exactly how much uh
Chinese industries uh need to be as a
share of the global total. I think we
can clearly see now that China is a
leader in electric vehicles. It is a
leader in all sorts of industrial
robotics. China has a complete chokeold
on the solar industry. China owns about
90% of this industry. If you take a look
at rare earth magnets, which caused a
lot of grief to the Trump administration
earlier this year when it was trying to
prosecute the trade war, China has about
90% of the processing uh for these uh
goods. And if we take a look at a lot of
manufactured goods segment by segment,
we'll see that China owns about 35% of
global manufacturing value ad. And if we
take a look at a couple of these
particularly high-end technologies,
almost everything aside from
semiconductors as well as aviation,
which are big Chinese weaknesses, China
is uh becoming uh really strong in um
most advanced technologies. Now I wonder
to what extent this is the result of
government planning. I would certainly
not say that this was some uh genius
demonstration of spectacular central
planning from Beijing that got China
where it is today. Sometimes uh China is
able to produce these successes out of
some degree of government policy. But
just as often whenever we can take a
look at these examples, we can find
other examples in which government
policy produced only waste and scams and
fraud and to some degree over capacity
as well. I would situate China's success
mostly on the level of its fiercely
dynamic entrepreneurs. You can have
capitalist competition I would say far
more cutthroat than what we would see uh
in the US. I've seen
>> why why is that?
>> It starts with the scale of the country.
Uh I remember visiting a uh company that
had grown already a little bit large. It
was called Maitwan, which is now one of
these big Chinese online platform
companies. And Maitwanine uh said that
we survived after being one of 5,000
clones of Groupon in China. They simply
cloned the Groupon idea and out of this
battle royale uh they managed to brawl
it out with everyone else and uh they
were the only ones left standing. If we
take a look at a lot of these other
industries that uh China completely
dominates uh solar for example, China
completely owns this industry. The solar
industry has collapsed in prices. I
think the figure is something like 94%
drop in prices since the year 2000. And
that is in large part of what Chinese
companies have done in making the
processes better and making the panels
themselves more efficient. And what has
been a national success, strategic
success for the government as well as
producing a lot of consumer benefits has
entailed absolutely miserable
competition for these companies and
absolutely miserable returns for their
investors. And in a sense, I think this
is what socialism with Chinese
characteristics mean. The state wins,
consumers win, but it is actually pretty
rough for any of these companies uh out
there. And I think this is um one of the
things that I did when I was writing
this book was to try to confront head-on
whether we needed something like free
speech and free thinking in order to
drive a lot of innovation as well as
dynamism and I'm not sure that these are
terribly important because if we take a
look at a lot of highly autocratic
regimes uh regimes I would say are more
autocratic than China today uh namely
Stalin's Russia Stalin Soviet Union as
well as Hitler's Germany. Um these were
also regimes that ended up producing a
lot of state-driven innovation. Um if we
take a look at uh the record of Soviet
science, you know, there were a lot of
these Nobel Prize winners that barely
staggered out of gulogs uh out of the
Soviet Union before they made their
great prize-winning innovations. Soviet
um military scientists, fighter jet
scientists, nuclear scientists had all
been persecuted by Stalin uh himself.
And also with Nazi Germany, there were
these breakthroughs in rocketry and
fighter jets in spite of a highly
autocratic fascist totalitarian regime.
And I think what matters a lot for
innovation is simply the funding.
Sometimes they really care about free
speech. Sometimes they care about
creative expression. But for many of
them, they're able to make breakthroughs
if you just give them a really big lab.
But what about the argument that says
look authoritarian and autocratic models
can be really good at driving production
and innovation in areas where there is
lowhanging fruit. And so clearly a lot
of what China has done technologically
is a kind of catchup where you are
essentially taking a western product or
a western innovation and perfecting it,
figuring out mass production, doing all
these kinds of things, right? But when
it comes to discovery, right, that you
know, figuring out what the new thing
is, the thing that you can't centrally
plan, American democratic capitalism
tends to be better. Liberal societies
tend to be more successful. By the
1970s, you know, Soviet Union was not
doing anything substantially cutting
edge. The space program was amazing for
a while and then it wasn't. The economy
grew quickly and then it didn't, right?
So what is the case that China has
escaped that kind of trap that it's not
just catching up but that it is actually
going beyond what liberal and democratic
societies are achieving technologically?
I'm not sure that this is a really big
trap because I think that the US is
really good at making these sort of
discoveries but the US also is uh unable
uh very significantly to actually follow
through with building industries out of
these discoveries. Uh Bell Labs invented
this great new scientific project uh in
the solar industry in 1954. uh it
remained for the most part a scientific
project until the Germans developed it
into a much bigger industry throughout
the 2000s and subsequently uh all of the
Chinese firms were able to copy the
German um expertise and they completely
overran the industry such that uh the
Germans and the Americans barely have a
very strong solar industry anymore even
after quite a lot of tariffs and
protection. And so I think this
dichotomy of innovation and production
is at best blurry because I've seen too
many examples of Chinese simply building
up uh accreatively step by step uh
trying to perfect an industry such that
you get to a whole new industry by the
time that they really perfected. The
Chinese are just better at climbing
these ladders in which the Americans
have placed. So Linda, let's just drill
down for a minute into why that is
because
part of your argument is that it is
choices that the state has made. But you
just said that often the state still
seems to make bad choices.
>> Yes.
>> And it so it emerges as organically from
frantic competition in a large market.
But then you also said you use the
phrase socialism with Chinese
characteristics, right? which implies
that this frantic competition is still
constrained in some way by Marxist or
socialist norms. So what what is the
actual model? Why are they climbing the
ladders faster? I think that the first
and most important part of China's
technological success has to do with
something I call process knowledge. So
process knowledge is also known as tacet
knowledge, also known as industrial
expertise. In a kitchen analogy, it is
something like the recipe. And the
hardware is something like the stoves
and the pots and the pans. But let's say
Ross, we give someone who's never cooked
a day in his life, the most welle
equipped kitchen, as well as the most
exquisitly detailed recipe. Are we sure
that this person will be able to do
something as simple as frying an egg for
breakfast? uh I'm not sure if um you
know that person will not burn the
kitchen down in some big way and
>> my my children have often given evidence
for that hypothesis.
>> Yes. Yes. And I think the crucial part
of technology is actually all of this
tacid knowledge process knowledge that
we can't really write down and that is
the core part of what has been driving
China's technological advantage. It
started when um China started making
pretty simple things, socks, t-shirts,
all these things that we think and know
are not terribly important before they
get to slightly more complex shoes. And
then they get to everything that
includes now iPhones and electric
vehicle batteries that they are really
good at climbing this ladder. If we take
a look at China's hardware capital,
Shenzhen, Shenzhen was mostly a
backwater making textiles all the way up
until 2008 when Shenzhen started
producing Steve Jobs's iPhones. And so
iPhones started rolling off the line and
you had this enormous workforce,
hundreds of thousands of people making
the most sophisticated consumer
electronics in the world. Um, making
next consumer drones, more sophisticated
electronics. And I think that is really
the basis of China's technology
advantage. It is just these gigantic
investments in workforce. The state
sometimes gets in the way. The state
sometimes harnesses this workforce. You
also have a lot of entrepreneurial
energy. I'm not sure if I wanted to
define it as state capitalism with
Chinese characteristics, but I just view
it as technological catch-up. Right. But
what is the the difference then between
that model and ours? It's like part of
your argument is that America has lost a
lot of that knowledge through the
process of outsourcing and allowing
factories to move overseas and allowing
de-industrialization to happen, right?
And becoming, you know, an information
and financial services and service
economy, a very rich one, but not an
industrial economy in the way that China
is. I want to understand how much of
this is saying there are engineering
minds in the pulit bureau who made these
choices that maybe you can only make in
an authoritarian society or maybe we
could have made different choices
ourselves in the US. How much of it is
that
versus some other element of competition
or culture in China right now? I think
the crucial mistake in the US was that
it wasn't even a choice that the US
really made to outsource a lot of
manufacturing. Now, there is this line
that politicians like to trot out that
China stole all the jobs. And sure,
that's one framing of it, but I think a
more accurate framing is that since the
1990s, big American manufacturers had
been actively moving their production to
China, and the US government did almost
nothing to restrain them. And I'm not
sure whether that was actually a really
deliberate choice plotted out by the
Council of Economic Adviserss advising
uh Bill Clinton. Maybe it was, but I
think this was just kind of a process of
business lobbying saying, well, we need
to tap into this market and produce at
these uh cheaper places. And something
that the Communist Party actively
decided was that we are going to import
big American manufacturers in the 1990s
and 2000s, right? Apple, Tesla, if they
want to build their products here, we
are going to welcome uh Steve Jobs and
Elon Musk to train our workers and make
them as good as they can be. That was a
more conscious decision I think made by
engineers who realized they had to catch
up to the global frontier. They couldn't
do it with China's existing level of
technology and they were going to have
Americans help them.
But so to to speak to the views of like
Bill Clinton's Council of Economic
Adviserss or any of the other American
policy makers who presided over this
transfer of industrial might. For a lot
of them, there was one an assumption
that has been proven false, which was
that economic development would
inevitably lead to liberalization in
China, would turn China into a
democracy, and that would, you know,
make the world more likely to be at
peace and have relations between the US
and China get better and better and so
on. That was, at least so far, has been
completely falsified. But there was also
just an a basic economic assumption, a
kind of free traders assumption that
says, well, if China gets really good at
building things and sells them to us and
we have an economy that's in a different
phase, in a different stage and is based
more on information and services and
these things like this, as long as we
stay rich, that's okay. And the US,
while there obviously are big parts of
the US that suffered from the
relationship with China that were
hollowed out, the US has remained very
rich, the American economy, despite what
some doomsayers would say is not a
disaster area. And so someone could
listen to your arguments and read your
book and say, "Okay, but what are the
actual stakes here? What is China
building and investing for apart from
wealth for its own sake? What kind of
power does it want?
>> I think you're absolutely right that
America is highly dynamic and I don't
want to count out America in um this
stage of competition. I think at various
points the US will look weak, at various
points it will look strong. But what are
the stakes here? Because I think there
is still a broad view in the US that the
industrialization has been pretty bad.
Not just for regions like Pennsylvania
or Michigan where uh the
industrialization has been felt pretty
badly.
There's also a pretty clear loss of
manufacturing expertise that represents
in the declining fortunes of American
apex manufacturers. Companies like
Intel, Boeing, Detroit, automakers, and
now increasingly Tesla. They've had
mostly bad news over the last few
quarters, last few years. uh in the case
of Detroit last few decades the apex
manufacturers are not working very well
and if we take a look at the early days
of the covid pandemic the US
manufacturers were not very good at
making simple products either necessary
products like cotton swabs and um cotton
masks and they weren't able to really
rejig their supply lines uh in order to
build out uh critical materials if we
take a look at the US defense industrial
base after the US shipped a lot of
munitions to Ukraine and its
self-defense against Russia. The US
hasn't really been able to rebuild its
munition stockpiles. If we take a look
at naval ships with the US Navy, every
class of ships is now behind schedule.
And so part of the
>> So let's let's pause there then. So you
just offered two somewhat different
um examples of what the US loses. So the
first one would be if China is a
manufacturing powerhouse and we are not
even if our per capita GDP looks good
now over time we will just inevitably
get poor relative to China. Is that
right? Is that what again in the we're
making the bullish case for China but is
that would that be your expectation?
>> I that could be a scenario. I'm not
expecting that China will be richer uh
than the US. But I think that what China
will do is to seize more technological
industries of the future in the way it
already has and in the apocalyptic
scenario in which these two countries
meet in the conflict ration you need a
material base. You need a defense
industrial base in order to meet on the
battlefield. And so I can see a scenario
in which the US can't get its act
together to produce drones and ships and
munitions and the Chinese are able to.
So it's not just about the economy.
>> That's the second point, right? I just
wanted to think about the economic side
of this, right? That like
>> are we telling a story where even if
there isn't a war between the US and
China, the average American is just
going to be poorer than we otherwise
would be over a prolonged period of
time. Yeah. I wonder whether services is
going to be able to absorb even more of
the uh US workforce. Right now about um
11% of the American workforce works in
manufacturing. Much of the rest is in
services. Uh can the US be a great power
if a lot more people are working in
Hollywood, in Silicon Valley, in Wall
Street, uh in healthcare, in consulting?
Is that even a likely scenario? If we
have a lot of people in Silicon Valley
trying to produce artificial
intelligence that is going to make it
much more difficult I think um to uh for
entry- level people to find jobs in a
lot of these service knowledge based
sectors and so I'm not very optimistic
that very many people will be able to
manufacture in the US but I think there
is also strong limits in how much
services can absorb and this is where
the economics make me nervous okay so
you have the possibility of US economic
decline but then you have direct great
power conflict where it seems like very
straightforwardly
you're saying the US is in increasing
danger of just losing our position as
the world's dominant military power
being in a position where we would
likely lose a war to China. Do you think
we would lose a war to China if we had
fought a war in the next 5 years?
>> I can't comment on whether the US would
lose. I think I'm not a military
analyst. I wonder um whether the uh US
would be able to win on the battlefield
because it depends on the battlefield if
uh Beijing is intent on dominating this
island nation of Taiwan which hangs just
a few hundred miles off of its shores
and if it is not intending to do
something like seize Guam or seize
Hawaii then I think it is quite possible
that uh China is able to overwhelm
Taiwan pretty quickly and the US Navy
isn't able to sail so far uh in order to
free and uh maintain the safety and
integrity of Taiwan. I certainly don't
see any scenario in which the US tries
to invade and incur into mainland China
and I don't see the Chinese ever trying
to seize Los Angeles and California. So,
it depends on the battlefield, but
certainly I feel like we can't win a war
without drones and munitions. And right
now it doesn't look like the US is
really able to produce these in
quantity.
>> But what is so what does China in terms
of that battlefield question right? Is
China primarily building to become a
global superpower in as a successor to
the US and before that Great Britain or
are they primarily building for an idea
of being kind of you know a
self-sufficient East Asian civilization
unto themselves which gathers in Taiwan
and you know can bully Vietnam etc but
is not fundamentally trying to do what
the US has done for the last few decades
where Where are you on sort of those two
possibilities?
>> Yeah, I think it's a matter of
considerable debate among the
specialists uh who are looking at the
tea leaves and trying to read the mind
of Beijing. Um and I think the contrast
is with these uh two big binaries.
because China want to supplant the US
wholesale as the global superpower not
only in technology but also financial
terms and diplomatic terms uh and pretty
much everything else that the US is good
at. Um or does it want to kind of
retreat and um become the celestial
empire once more as the uh Ting dynasty
once called itself? Close the doors
against all of the barbarians. sees
Taiwan because it must to fulfill the
aims of Mao in the civil war and you
know mostly dominate its near neighbors.
My view is that I think that China is
closer to the latter, closer to being
the serene empire that doesn't care
about the turmoils of um the crazy
Americans outside. But I think that
there the question then has to become
something like if China is fully able to
dominate its near neighbors in East
Asia, countries like the Philippines and
Vietnam and Malaysia such that it is
able to bring those state leaders out to
cowtow for the emperor's pleasure in
Beijing. How much does that in
particular threaten American interests?
And how much should America really feel
that it needs to defend these regions
against that potential threat? And I
don't have a super strong view here.
Mostly what I think is that China is
achieving some goal of being very
physically strong in terms of
manufacturing might. I don't think that
it is uh being a great superpower in
terms of cultural production and I think
their progress is mostly constrained in
the physical manufacturing world. And do
you think the AI race changes that at
all or sort of maybe determines the
shape of where Chinese power might go?
>> I am skeptical. I spend a lot of time in
Silicon Valley uh because I am part of
the Hoover Institution and I spend some
time uh speaking to nerds who want to
build God in a box.
>> I I I am I'm familiar with that. Yes.
>> Yes. And I think there is kind of this
um you know escaton that they uh want to
bring about in which the world kind of
ends in something like 2027 and we kind
of don't have a great vision beyond 2027
and my vision of the US and China are
that both are giant countries that are
increasingly locking horns although not
always um that are not going to fall
into the sea and just sink into the
Pacific ocean or something. They are
both very strong powers that have a
desire to maintain their own prestige
and maintain their own power. They are
going to be, I think, staring each other
down for decades. And I don't think that
there will be any scenario quite like a
repeat of the Soviet Union in which one
power simply implodes, fails to get back
up. And I think the competition is
longasting. And the sooner that we let
go of this idea that it is just going to
be one technology that determines
everything, it is just going to be one
cultural product. It has not won
anything. It is a long-term race for
decades. Okay, let's talk about a future
where the Chinese model seems to fail.
Um so I think we're establishing as a
scenario a scenario for 2050 let's say
of Chinese success and American failure
in your terms looks like a China that is
dominant in Asia clearly technologically
dominant above and beyond the US and
generating more and more wealth through
manufacturing
even if the average Chinese person is
still poorer than the average American
in a way that makes America feel like a
kind of decadent and stagnant backwater,
a great power, but a a great power in
clear and sustained decline. I think
does that is that that's fair as a kind
of like
>> that's a potential
>> that's a potential scenario for Chinese
success. Um how could China how could
this model fail? What do engineers get
wrong?
engineers are meddling extensively in
the economy and maybe we will find uh
and wake up one day that central
planning is a ginormous failure and the
Chinese will not able to fundamentally
overcome these contradictions in the
model of state capitalism with Chinese
characteristics. I think that a lot of
people have been pretty extensively
burned out by the mistakes and some of
the foibless of the communist party. A
lot of what I have seen is that many
young Chinese are willing to take leave
of the great rejuvenation that is
conducted in their name. We have a lot
of data of Chinese entrepreneurs, a lot
of Chinese wealthy people who would much
rather live their lives in kind of
Chinese communities like Irvine,
California by buying some property and
just, you know, having their businesses
be established in Singapore and still
not really quite trusting the Communist
Party to respect everything that they
want to do. Young Chinese creative types
are interested in smoking dope uh just
as young Californian types may be. They
are smoking dope in Chiang Mai. I've
spent a little bit of time uh seeing
these people who are just as into
marijuana as well as cryptocurrencies uh
as folks are in Silicon Valley. And what
we see is that also a lot of uh Chinese
migrants uh those who are not
necessarily the rich, those who are not
necessarily the creative types uh dare
to fly to Ecuador which uh has been vis
uh for a period of time to Chinese and
try to walk across the Darian gap, a
perilous journey to cross to the
southwestern border of the United
States. At its peak in 2024, the US was
apprehending something like 30 to 40,000
Chinese who were trying to cross over
into Texas, which is something that
still blows my mind that many people
would try to do that to escape the
regime. And what do you feel like
they're most trying to escape? Is it
political repression? Is it the sense
that even if you're getting rich, the
government can change its engineering
plan tomorrow and strip your wealth
away? like what what aspect of China is
driving the desire to
you know go somewhere else? Well, let's
take a look at these uh three canonical
groups because I think they have three
different motivations. If we take a look
at the wealthy, the rich, the
politically connected, still many
communist party senior members uh have
their kids uh in the US or the UK
somewhere abroad because they're not
quite sure that they're going to be
purged. And I think there is something
peculiarly precarious about
authoritarian regimes where if you're a
rich person uh let's say in Beijing, you
might be working in the financial
industry and uh last year the Communist
Party declared that there was going to
be a salary cap of $400,000 for people
working in finance and you may have to
give some of your money back to the
state if you've been earning more than
that. Or if you're part of the party
elite, part of the military elite, your
patron is purged for corruption and the
entire network falls away. You could be
a creative person uh working as a
journalist in China. There are still
many creative journalists in China who
have their pieces, their essays, their
reporting completely censored by the
state. And after a few times this
happens, a lot of people uh get quite
mad and they move to a place like New
York. A few blocks from here in October,
I went to attend a feminist stand-up
comedy show in Mandarin in which there
were a lot of creative types from China,
uh, all women giving, telling jokes and
sharing stories. And it's hard to
imagine that something like this may
have been necessary perhaps 10 years ago
before she consolidated his power. And
then for the lower skilled migrants who
are not necessarily educated very well,
who are not necessarily uh very wealthy,
their reasons for crossing are still
much more complex. I don't think I have
a good handle on this question.
>> Would these be like the kind of people
who are trying to do the Darian gap
trying to get to Texas? Basically,
>> get to Texas, right?
>> And maybe they felt really constrained
in the COVID lockdowns. uh maybe they
felt that their property uh had been um
has lost its value and so they are
trying to escape and they've become
things like Uber drivers uh in uh
California and just trying to make a
living not necessarily trying to flee
the political regime.
>> I mean to me that seems like a big
weakness for a great power. It seems and
it seems from an American perspective
>> just somewhat extraordinary. The idea
that you could simultaneously say,
"Look, the 21st century could be the
Chinese century. China is going to be
dominant and we're going to decline."
And yet the average best and brightest
in China would happily
accept American citizenship tomorrow,
which is probably true for lots and lots
of people, right? I feel like it's hard
for me to square those two realities,
right? that like as long as lots and
lots of talent would rather bet on even
chaotic misgoverned bad infrastructure,
you know, what whatever else you dislike
about America from Donald Trump to
wokeness to everything in between. As
long as so many talented Chinese would
choose that over China, that just seems
like a really strong American advantage.
>> Absolutely. I completely agree. And the
only question is how many. I'm not sure
if it is quite the average uh educated
elite person in Beijing and Shanghai
would still want to move to the US, but
they do. But at least they want to
hedge.
>> They would happily accept an offshore
bank account, a house in Vancouver if
not the or a house in Irvine and their
kid at a one of their kids at a US
school. They'd accept that.
>> Well, I would accept that if you gave me
a Swiss bank account and a home in
Vancouver as well. And maybe it makes
sense for many people. I think that
there are many parts of the Chinese
elite that have gone abroad. I think
there is a complex bit of bit of
motivations that vary yearbyear to what
extent people leave. But I think we can
certainly point out that many Chinese
entrepreneurs have decided that life in
Japan, in Singapore, in the US is much
easier. That if you move to the US, the
state leaves you alone. If you move to
Texas and Florida, people aggressively
leave you alone. And there is something
to that sort of comfort that still
attracts a lot of people for sure.
>> Let's also talk about sort of not just
how an engineering society can feel
oppressive but also how it can actively
fail in your story about Chinese
success. You spend a lot of time on the
shadow side of these kind of big
projects, right? Some of these projects
look like white elephants. They look
like you know airports built when there
aren't enough people flying or apartment
blocks built that lots of people don't
want to live in right there is a kind of
problem of overbuilding building for
building's sake then you also have the
related problem that China has a deeper
version of the depopulation problem that
every rich and many non-rich countries
in the world are facing uh where birth
rates are very very low society is aging
rapidly
And in one of the most powerful parts of
your book, you have an account of how a
kind of engineering mentality cruy and
brutally made this problem worse because
China's engineers looked around in the
1970s and 80s and said, "Oh, our
population is growing exponentially. We
need the one child policy. We need to
impose low birth rates." and having
imposed low birth rates in an incredibly
brutal way, it turned out to be very
hard to turn higher birth rates back on.
So looking at those two problems, you
have I feel like it's you can see a
future in China where China 2050 2070
more 2070 maybe than 2050 isn't this
sort of self-sufficient dynamic Asia-
dominating empire, but it's a society of
ghost cities,
you know, with no children that are sort
of monuments to engineering's failure,
right? talk about that those scenarios.
>> Yeah. Well, let's consider physical
engineering as well as social
engineering. I would say that for the
most part physical engineering is still
overwhelmingly positive for China.
Though you have these bridges to
nowhere. Guo is heavily heavily
indebted. The local government has a
problem paying back the bonds to build
these sorts of bridges. Uh there's not
only a financial cost, there's an
environmental cost in which you're
pouring a lot of carbonint intensive
cement for essentially nothing. Uh there
is also a human displacement cost
because a lot of people have been moved
especially for building hydroelectric
dams uh out to places that they're not
very familiar. But I would say that's
something like there's maybe an 80%
positive um 20% negative. That ratio
might change over time, but I think
physical dynamism is a good thing. And I
would say that the United States needs a
lot more of this. And I would assign
completely the opposite ratio on social
engineering because the fundamental
problem of China, the most fundamental
problem with the engineering state is
that they cannot restrain themselves
from being only physical engineers. They
have to also get into social engineering
because they view the population as just
another building material as if it could
be remolded and torn down uh at their
pleasure. And thank you for picking up
the one child policy chapter of my book.
That was unexpectedly my favorite
chapter to write. That the one child
policy had uh been the peak of it was um
mostly throughout the 1980s. This was uh
before I was born. I was born in 1992
and my parents were both college
educated urbanites in the southwestern
province of Ying Nan uh where there
wasn't very high birth rates um in the
cities already and it was trudging
through the history of the brutality of
the one child policy which sounded quite
scientific at the time and sounds quite
rational you know it's just a number out
there but it was accomplished with the
most brutal means of forced
sterilizations forced abortions that was
medded out to um mostly people in the
countryside in what I described as a
campaign of rural terror against
overwhelmingly female bodies. And this
was something that was prosecuted like a
military campaign. uh women were sent
into hog cages into uh clinics and it
was a really difficult thing to read
these accounts of the terrible traumas
that people suffered uh and which
somehow also washed up on the shores of
the United States in which we have a lot
of overwhelmingly girls of Chinese
heritage uh that had grown up with
American families here um throughout the
one child policy. And I think the
Chinese government is now realizing that
it cannot turn the dial back up. It is
trying to engineer the population again
um to try to encourage people to have
children and so far it's finding that
it's much more easy to prevent births
with sterilizations and abortions rather
than to coers population.
Do you think there's any scenario
where discontent with that mode social
social engineering authoritarian means
and so on actually someday leads to a
political revolution in China because
this conversation has been sort of taken
for granted as a lot of people do now
right that the Chinese regime is stable
that the idea of liberalization and
democratization was sort of a fantasy um
is there any future where that's wrong
and where China 2050 or60 has
experienced some kind of democratic
revolution.
My view is that the regime is still
broadly stable in spite of these traumas
that it has inflicted on the population
and the one child policy is not even so
much discussed these days and I think a
lot of this trauma has faded a lot of
people
>> but there was not at the same scale but
there was trauma under the zero co
policy right too where you did have and
that's fresh in people's memories you
had incredible restrictions people
locked into apartment buildings. You had
some kind of protest culture emerging
out of that. Right? So even though
things fade into the past, the regime
generates new forms of sort of
engineered,
you know, engineered suffering, right,
as new crises arise.
>> Yes, you're absolutely right that zero
COVID produced a lot of traumas. Uh, I
was living in Shanghai and Shanghai is
the city that suffered probably the
greatest lockdown ever attempted in the
history of humanity in which 25 million
people uh were unable to step foot
outside of their apartment compounds for
about 8 to 10 weeks in the spring of
2022. You know, Shanghai is a little bit
like New York in which the people hold
themselves to be uh quite a bit more
sophisticated than country bumpkins in
Washington DC or Beijing. They're more
cosmopolitan. Uh they're wealthier in
some ways. And Shanghai suffered this
really brutal reminder that actually it
is Beijing that after all run uh runs
them and rules them. And throughout the
Shanghai uh lockdown experience, uh
there were a lot of my friends who have
had to go without food so that they can
save the food for their children because
Shanghai had no way to organize
logistical deliveries of food to 25
million people uh when most of the city
should have been in lockdown and they
didn't want to spread the virus. And so
this was a very traumatic time for a lot
of people. And I think it is no surprise
that Shanghai had the sort of protest
culture that you mentioned. I have been
to one day of the Shanghai protests
where people had gathered on Urumsy
Road. This is kind of the bar district
with a lot of young people in China and
there were police kind of everywhere as
well as a lot of people milling about.
Um people were chanting. We have videos
of this chanting down with the Communist
Party, down with Xiinping, which was you
know completely absurd. I would not have
been able to believe something like this
could have happened. But after the
collapse of zero COVID right now, um if
you go to Shanghai and the last time I
went was in December of 2024, people
have drunk away a lot of their sorrows.
If we take a look at Urumi Road today,
it is the still the cocktail bars and
people would rather forget about this
terrible experience and see no profit in
dredging it back up again. And they walk
through Shanghai, the beautiful streets
of the French Concession. They feel that
their life is still often pretty good.
And if you're also subject to quite a
lot of the propaganda in China, which is
pretty negative Trump and pretty
negative about this order and everything
else uh that is wrong with the US as
well as the West, it's may not feel too
bad. Well, and in a way something we
were what we were talking about earlier,
the propensity of discontented Chinese
to seek a means of escape.
>> Yes. Maybe that is itself stabilizing to
the regime right that like if you are
deeply dissatisfied with life under you
know socialist state capital you know
whatever whatever you want to call it
there are means of exit that take the
people who might otherwise be leaders of
a resistance out of the country. My
parents were not much older than the
student protesters in Tangamin Square in
1989.
And throughout the 1990s, mostly for
economic reasons, uh they decided that
being in Yingan, a peripheral province,
which was an economic backwater then and
remains an economic backwater today, was
less preferable to moving to Toronto,
which is what we did when I was 7 years
old. First time I saw real snow. And I
think there is still an element of a lot
of creative Chinese who desperately want
a better life abroad and they are trying
to come to the United States or
elsewhere where they still seek that.
Yes. Let's end with advice for the
United States.
What are the actual implications of your
analysis and especially the kind of
bull's case that we started with the you
know Chinese century case for what the
US should do right now. What should we
be doing differently
if China is poised to be as powerful as
you think it might be?
>> I think that the US should first and
foremost rebuild its manufacturing base.
that follows quite naturally from a lot
of my analysis of China's greatest
strength, which is that China is a
manufacturing superpower and China is
poised to further de-industrialize
Europe and it is poised to further
de-industrialize the United States as
well. And I am skeptical that President
Trump's efforts to re-industrialize
America through the tariffs have been
very effective. And I am more positive
about the Biden administration's um
policies on efforts to reshore through
industrial policy. But still we can see
a lot of flaws with that approach as
well. So do you think
tariffs essentially trade war can't work
in your view because China has become
too strong and resilient? I think that
the trade war as prosecuted right now
through the tariffs is not going to be
very effective. If we just take a look
at the manufacturing employment data
since liberation day in April, the US
has lost about 40,000 manufacturing
workers. And with the next job release,
I'm not sure if we'll get that data
property back. Um, the US has lost
40,000 manufacturing workers since
liberation day. Um I think that it is
not a natural uh fit for the US to
become a technological scientific um
superpower uh to advance its science by
denying a lot of funding to scientific
agencies like the NSF and the NIH. I
think that universities flawed as they
are still driving a lot of American
innovation and scientific advancements.
And it also doesn't make a lot of sense
to attack universities in order to um
save the uh scientific uh base. And I
think it really doesn't make sense to
try to deport a lot of workers who may
be working in the construction industry
or the manufacturing industry or to
frighten away a lot of high-skilled
researchers who may want to be in the US
from Europe or Asia to do a lot of their
work here. And so I think that as
prosecuted the trade war is not making a
lot of sense. The um industrial push in
the US is not making a lot of sense.
Maybe there's something positive to be
said about Trump's energy agenda in
terms of building more nuclear in terms
of building more facilities online.
Maybe there's something positive about
the deregulatory agenda. I can certainly
see that case. But I certainly see more
headwinds than tailwinds. And you don't
think though that China fears at this
point being cut off from US markets the
way it would have 15 or 20 years ago?
>> Well, uh, Donald Trump sees us this way
and that. Uh, he was the initiator of
the tech war when I was living in
Beijing in 2018 when he designated
scores of China's technology companies
onto highly obscure blacklists
maintained by the Department of
Commerce. But here we are in his second
term and he's saying Nvidia chips. Well,
maybe China should have them. So, you
know, Trump is pretty erratic on this.
Uh when a journalist asked him whether
Chinese uh students should still be
coming to America, uh Trump said it's
our honor to have them. It's our honor
to have them. And I think that is
potentially the right approach. But that
is also butdding up against a lot of
other folks in his administration. seems
kind of weird to me that Donald Trump is
the most pro-China member of the White
House right now.
>> But do you do you think that just
reflects Trump being mercurial and
wanting to make deals and if Beijing
says, "Let's make a deal," he's excited
to make a deal. Or does it reflect a
kind of rational calculation that China
is now too strong to isolate in the way
that like some China hawks would want
and so you have to make deals with them
because it's just sort of an economic
imperative that you can't disentangle
China and America. I don't have a good
sense of what the Trump administration
is thinking, but there is a potential
world in which they have kind of made
that decision because after Trump raised
tariffs on China up to 150% which was
completely extraordinary, China
retaliated by suspending exports of rare
earth magnets which is one of these
other things that uh China really has
and the US doesn't. Subsequently,
automakers everywhere panicked. uh Ford
had to stop production in a couple of
its factories. And it is possible that
uh Trump and everyone else around him
have decided that well we really need
all of these Chinese goods because the
Chinese are not only very dominant in
our earth magnets. They also have a lot
of pharmaceutical ingredients, all sorts
of battery materials, all sorts of
electronics. It's almost exclusively a
Chinese product. Now I don't know if the
um Trump administration has simply
thrown in the towel or if they are
simply in dealmaker mode. Do you have a
view? I guess my what I see right which
is similar to what you describe is that
the Trump administration has been maybe
surprisingly successful in forcing all
kinds of countries and economies to
basically make unilateral concessions to
the US and much much less successful
when it comes to China itself. Yeah, it
just seems in a way too strong to run a
kind of trade war or protectionist
conflict against. But I don't have Yeah,
I don't have sort of special insight on
that. I just do think I do think that is
striking that it seems like the
ChineseAmerican relationship at the
moment seems
>> too big and too high risk for even Trump
to sort of fundamentally reframe. And I
was um living in Copenhagen this summer
um having cardamom buns and you know
enjoying all this uh wonderful uh
Denmark everything that has to offer
when I read one of your columns that I
thought was uh really right about how
the uh European Union completely became
submissive to the Trump administration
in these tariff negotiations. that what
Europe has shown is that it is
fundamentally just really weak that they
cannot get consensus in order to
retaliate against the US. That Europe
right now is a drift uh caught between
the Chinese which have waged a far more
successful trade war against German
automakers as well as the Americans with
their much stronger service industries.
And so I feel very much that you know a
lot of regions and countries are going
to be caught a drift by these two big
powers that Europe is going to be
de-industrialized. It's going to have
much more competition and it services
right-wing populist uh parties in Europe
are out pulling their incumbents uh
ruling parties pretty much everywhere.
And I think that as the economics get
worse the I don't think that the
politics will get better. And so I fear
this for the United States as well as
the economics gets worse in some ways as
you mentioned that the US might actually
be poorer in some meaningful way. And so
this is what I'm really nervous about
for the west. I'll accept the compliment
for my columns analysis but use it to
ask a geopolitical question which is to
what extent then in terms of how the US
approaches other countries and the rest
of the world
should we be basically trying to make a
kind of ideological argument against
China and say look we represent the free
world we represent liberal democracy we
should be on the same side as other
liberal democra ocracies. We should be,
you know, sort of rallying the Europeans
to a kind of conflict against autocracy.
That's sort of one framework for how to
think about a new cold war with China
where the model is the old cold war
versus a kind of, you know, what you
certainly see from the Trump
administration, but also see from, you
know, other voices as well, a kind of
realist view that says, look, China
doesn't want to revolutionize the world
the way the old Soviet Union did. It
doesn't have this global ideological
agenda. Its advantage in geopolitics is
that it's sort of cynical cynical
dealmaking, right? And so the US needs
to be a cynical dealmaker, too.
Where do you come down on that kind of
that kind of choice? I'm not sure if I
would sign on to either framing because
I'm not sure if the US and um China are
uh you know going to out compete each
other in cynical dealm where where are
all these deals going to be coming from
and I think what the view that I would
propose to you Ross is that this is not
so much about the the deal making um
it's not about the democracy you know
part of why I wrote this book was to get
us beyond these 19th century political
science terms. I'm really allergic to
political science terms like democratic
or capitalist, socialist, autocratic.
Let's try to be fun and inventive and
having a new framework to think about
these two big countries. Um and I think
what is ultimately going to be most
important is delivering well for its
people. That um the country that is
going to be able to meet the needs of
the people of its own people is going to
be the more triumphant power. It is not
to really the other side. Um it
is to make sure that people feel good
about the cities and the homes that they
live in. They feel like they have some
degree of affordability. They don't fear
shortages and inflation. That they feel
some sense of an economic uh future that
is still clear and bright glimmering
before them. And right now I think both
countries uh have done a lot to erode
their own advantages. China believes
that it its autocratic system is going
to be able to deal with these buffeting
technological headwinds, especially
driven by AI, that the uh Americans are
not really going to be able to um deal
with. that uh social media is obviously
driving all of us insane, that Elon is
trolling all of us to insanity with his
crazy tweets, and that somehow the um
West will be riven by some mixture of
economic distress, political mistakes,
social media, and the phones, as well as
the artificial intelligence that the
game goes to he who outlasts the
adversary. But what the Chinese want to
do is to just keep things really really
stable and just wait for the western
countries to collapse. And as we've
established, there's a lot of Chinese
who are willing to take leave of the
Chinese dream and the great
rejuvenation. And so I think the first
step for these two countries is to stop
delivering these humiliating self-
beatings and really try to understand
and do better. What do you think?
>> The humiliating self- beatings will
continue until morale improves. But I'm
afraid that's the case.
>> Dan Wong, thank you so much for joining
me.
>> Thank you very much, Ross.
[Music]